README.md, before:

PhysUnits-CT
============

A C++ library for compile-time dimensional analysis and unit/quantity manipulation and conversion.

This library is based on the quantity compile-time library by Michael S. Kenniston[1] and expanded and adapted to compile with current compilers by Martin Moene.

This easy to use header-only library is intended to work with a wide range of compilers, including MSVC 6.

Example
---------

```C++
#include "phys/units/quantity.hpp"

using namespace phys::units;

int main()
{
    quantity<speed_d> speed = 45 * kilo() * meter() / second();
}
```

Other libraries
-----------------

- [PhysUnits-RT](https://github.com/martinmoene/PhysUnits-RT) - Run-time companion of this library.  
- [PhysUnits-CT-Cpp11](https://github.com/martinmoene/PhysUnits-CT-Cpp11) - C++11 compile-time companion of this library.  
- [Boost.Units](http://www.boost.org/doc/libs/1_51_0/libs/units/) - Zero-overhead dimensional analysis and unit/quantity manipulation and conversion in C++.  
- [unitscpp](http://code.google.com/p/unitscpp/) - A lightweight C++ library for physical calculation with units.  

Usage
-------

### Definition of terms

Adapted from Boost.Units:

- <b>Base dimension</b>: A base dimension is loosely defined as a measurable entity of interest; in conventional dimensional analysis, base dimensions include length ([L]), mass ([M]), time ([T]), etc.. Base dimensions are essentially a tag type and provide no dimensional analysis functionality themselves.
- <b>Dimension</b>: A collection of zero or more base dimensions, each potentially raised to a different rational power. For example, length = [L]^1, area = [L]^2, velocity = [L]^1/[T]^1, and energy = [M]^1 [L]^2/[T]^2 are all dimensions.
- <b>Base unit</b>: A base unit represents a specific measure of a dimension. For example, while length is an abstract measure of distance, the meter is a concrete base unit of distance. Conversions are defined using base units. Much like base dimensions, base units are a tag type used solely to define units and do not support dimensional analysis algebra.
- <b>Unit</b>: A set of base units raised to rational exponents, e.g. m^1, kg^1, m^1/s^2.
- <b>System</b>: A unit system is a collection of base units representing all the measurable entities of interest for a specific problem. For example, the SI unit system defines seven base units : length ([L]) in meters, mass ([M]) in kilograms, time ([T]) in seconds, current ([I]) in amperes, temperature ([theta]) in kelvin, amount ([N]) in moles, and luminous intensity ([J]) in candelas. All measurable entities within the SI system can be represented as products of various integer or rational powers of these seven base units.
- <b>Quantity</b>: A quantity represents a concrete amount of a unit. Thus, while the meter is the base unit of length in the SI system, 5.5 meters is a quantity of length in that system.

### Limitations

This library only supports the use of the <em>SI unit system</em>.

This library only supports <em>integral powers</em> of the dimensions.

The <em>representation or value type</em> in the implementation of quantity is fixed and cannot be defined separately for each quantity. However you can change the type for all uses within a translation unit by defining `PHYS_UNITS_REP_TYPE` before inclusion of header quantity.hpp. Default this type is `double`.

### Output

The following example shows the quantity type in the computation of work from force and distance and the printing of the result on standard output.

```C++
#include <iostream>

#include "phys/units/io.hpp"
#include "phys/units/quantity.hpp"

using namespace phys::units;
using namespace phys::units::io;

quantity<energy_d>
work( const quantity<force_d> & F, const quantity<length_d> & dx )
{
    return F * dx; // Defines the relation: work = force * distance.
}

int main()
{
    /// Test calculation of work.
    quantity<force_d>       F ( 2.0 * newton());  // Define a quantity of force.
    quantity<length_d>      dx( 2.0 * meter() );  // and a distance,
    quantity<energy_d>      E ( work( F, dx ) );  // and calculate the work done.

    std::cout << "F  = " << F  << std::endl
              << "dx = " << dx << std::endl
              << "E  = " << E  << std::endl;
}
```

The output produced is:

```Text
F  = 2 N
dx = 2 m
E  = 4 J
```

The following example demonstrates printing in default floating point notation and in [engineering notation](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Engineering_notation), using [metric prefixes](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Metric_prefix).

```C++
#include <iostream>

#include "phys/units/io.hpp"
#include "phys/units/quantity.hpp"

using namespace phys::units;

int main()
{
    quantity<electric_resistance_d> R( 4.7 * kilo() * volt() / ampere() );

    {
        using namespace phys::units::io;
        std::cout << "R = " << R << std::endl;
    }
    {
        using namespace phys::units::io::eng;
        std::cout << "R = " << R << std::endl;
    }
}
```

The output produced is:

```Text
R = 4700 Ohm
R = 4.7 kOhm
```

See namespaces `io` and `io::eng` for further information.

Instead of unit names such as J, you can also obtain the unit expressed in base dimensions.

```C++
#include <iostream>

#include "phys/units/quantity.hpp"
#include "phys/units/quantity_io.hpp"

using namespace phys::units;
using namespace phys::units::io;

int main()
{
    std::cout << "J = " << joule() << std::endl;
}
```

The output produced is:

```Text
J = m+2 kg s-2
```

### Convenience functions

There are several convenience functions, such as:

- `std::string to_magnitude( quantity<...> const & q )` - the quantity's magnitude represented as string
- `std::string to_unit_name( quantity<...> const & q )` - the quantity's unit name, e.g. 'hertz'
- `std::string to_unit_symbol( quantity<...> const & q )` - the quantity's unit symbol, e.g. 'Hz'
- `std::string to_string( long double const value )` - the value of a long double represented as string

In namespace `io`:

- `std::string to_string( quantity<...> const & q )` - the quantity represented as string in scientific notation
- `std::ostream & operator<<( std::ostream & os, quantity<...> const & q )` - output the quantity to a stream in scientific notation

In namespace `io::eng`:

- `std::string to_string( quantity<...> const & q )` - the quantity represented as string in engineering notation
- `std::ostream & operator<<( std::ostream & os, quantity<...> const & q )` - output the quantity to a stream in engineering notation

### Error handling

Error handling with respect to mixing incompatible dimensions occurs at compile-time.

### Mixing run-time and compile-time libraries

Although this library seems to be in the `phys::units` namespace, it does so through *using* the `ct` namespace in the global namespace. So this library actually lives in the `ct::phys::units` namespace. When you want to mix this library with its compile-time companion, the `ct` namespace must be applied. This can be accomplished by defining `PHYS_UNITS_IN_CT_NAMESPACE`.

Dependencies
--------------

This library has no dependencies other than the standard C++ libraries.

Performance
-------------

TBD

```Text
Relative running time (lower is better)

Compiler        Option : double : quantity
-----------------------+--------+-------------
GCC 4.6.2         -O2  :  1     :  . (1)
MS VC6/VS6        -O2  :  .     :  . (1.x)
MS VC8/VS2005     -O2  :  .     :  . (1.x)
MS VC2010/VS2010  -O2  :  .     :  . (1.x)

Measured on a AMD Athlon 64 X2 Dual Core Processor 5600+, 64kB L1 Data, 64kB L1 Instruction, 512kB L2, 3.2 GB RAM
```

Compilers known to work
-------------------------

- GCC 4.5.2, 4.6.2
- MS VC6/VS6 - (VC6 lacks ADL).
- MS VC8/VS2005
- MS VC2010/VS2010

Ideas for improvement
-----------------------

Allow to specify a conversion offset between two units, e.g. to make conversion between 'C and K possible (see Boost.Units).

It may be nice if you can obtain a quantity in a unit representation of your choice, e.g. in kWh in stead of J [m+2 kg s-2]. See G.S. Novak. [Conversion of units of measurement (PDF)](http://reference.kfupm.edu.sa/content/c/o/conversion_of_units_of_measurement__42431.pdf)". 1 August 1997.

### References

[1] Michael Kenniston. [The Quantity Library](http://home.xnet.com/~msk/quantity/quantity.html). ([Rationale](http://home.xnet.com/%7Emsk/quantity/quantity.html), Quantity [folder](http://www.xnet.com/%7Emsk/quantity)). 16 July 2001, rev 0.4.

[2] Ambler Thompson and Barry N. Taylor. [Guide for the Use of the International System of Units (SI)](http://physics.nist.gov/cuu/pdf/sp811.pdf). NIST Special Publication 811 2008 Edition.

Commit message:

Add NIST Special Publication 330 2019 Edition to section References

README.md, after:

PhysUnits-CT
============

A C++ library for compile-time dimensional analysis and unit/quantity manipulation and conversion.

This library is based on the quantity compile-time library by Michael S. Kenniston[1] and expanded and adapted to compile with current compilers by Martin Moene.

This easy to use header-only library is intended to work with a wide range of compilers, including MSVC 6.

Example
---------

```C++
#include "phys/units/quantity.hpp"

using namespace phys::units;

int main()
{
    quantity<speed_d> speed = 45 * kilo() * meter() / second();
}
```

Other libraries
-----------------

- [PhysUnits-RT](https://github.com/martinmoene/PhysUnits-RT) - Run-time companion of this library.  
- [PhysUnits-CT-Cpp11](https://github.com/martinmoene/PhysUnits-CT-Cpp11) - C++11 compile-time companion of this library.  
- [Boost.Units](http://www.boost.org/doc/libs/1_51_0/libs/units/) - Zero-overhead dimensional analysis and unit/quantity manipulation and conversion in C++.  
- [unitscpp](http://code.google.com/p/unitscpp/) - A lightweight C++ library for physical calculation with units.  

Usage
-------

### Definition of terms

Adapted from Boost.Units:

- <b>Base dimension</b>: A base dimension is loosely defined as a measurable entity of interest; in conventional dimensional analysis, base dimensions include length ([L]), mass ([M]), time ([T]), etc.. Base dimensions are essentially a tag type and provide no dimensional analysis functionality themselves.
- <b>Dimension</b>: A collection of zero or more base dimensions, each potentially raised to a different rational power. For example, length = [L]^1, area = [L]^2, velocity = [L]^1/[T]^1, and energy = [M]^1 [L]^2/[T]^2 are all dimensions.
- <b>Base unit</b>: A base unit represents a specific measure of a dimension. For example, while length is an abstract measure of distance, the meter is a concrete base unit of distance. Conversions are defined using base units. Much like base dimensions, base units are a tag type used solely to define units and do not support dimensional analysis algebra.
- <b>Unit</b>: A set of base units raised to rational exponents, e.g. m^1, kg^1, m^1/s^2.
- <b>System</b>: A unit system is a collection of base units representing all the measurable entities of interest for a specific problem. For example, the SI unit system defines seven base units : length ([L]) in meters, mass ([M]) in kilograms, time ([T]) in seconds, current ([I]) in amperes, temperature ([theta]) in kelvin, amount ([N]) in moles, and luminous intensity ([J]) in candelas. All measurable entities within the SI system can be represented as products of various integer or rational powers of these seven base units.
- <b>Quantity</b>: A quantity represents a concrete amount of a unit. Thus, while the meter is the base unit of length in the SI system, 5.5 meters is a quantity of length in that system.

### Limitations

This library only supports the use of the <em>SI unit system</em>.

This library only supports <em>integral powers</em> of the dimensions.

The <em>representation or value type</em> in the implementation of quantity is fixed and cannot be defined separately for each quantity. However you can change the type for all uses within a translation unit by defining `PHYS_UNITS_REP_TYPE` before inclusion of header quantity.hpp. Default this type is `double`.

### Output

The following example shows the quantity type in the computation of work from force and distance and the printing of the result on standard output.

```C++
#include <iostream>

#include "phys/units/io.hpp"
#include "phys/units/quantity.hpp"

using namespace phys::units;
using namespace phys::units::io;

quantity<energy_d>
work( const quantity<force_d> & F, const quantity<length_d> & dx )
{
    return F * dx; // Defines the relation: work = force * distance.
}

int main()
{
    /// Test calculation of work.
    quantity<force_d>       F ( 2.0 * newton());  // Define a quantity of force.
    quantity<length_d>      dx( 2.0 * meter() );  // and a distance,
    quantity<energy_d>      E ( work( F, dx ) );  // and calculate the work done.

    std::cout << "F  = " << F  << std::endl
              << "dx = " << dx << std::endl
              << "E  = " << E  << std::endl;
}
```

The output produced is:

```Text
F  = 2 N
dx = 2 m
E  = 4 J
```

The following example demonstrates printing in default floating point notation and in [engineering notation](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Engineering_notation), using [metric prefixes](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Metric_prefix).

```C++
#include <iostream>

#include "phys/units/io.hpp"
#include "phys/units/quantity.hpp"

using namespace phys::units;

int main()
{
    quantity<electric_resistance_d> R( 4.7 * kilo() * volt() / ampere() );

    {
        using namespace phys::units::io;
        std::cout << "R = " << R << std::endl;
    }
    {
        using namespace phys::units::io::eng;
        std::cout << "R = " << R << std::endl;
    }
}
```

The output produced is:

```Text
R = 4700 Ohm
R = 4.7 kOhm
```

See namespaces `io` and `io::eng` for further information.

Instead of unit names such as J, you can also obtain the unit expressed in base dimensions.

```C++
#include <iostream>

#include "phys/units/quantity.hpp"
#include "phys/units/quantity_io.hpp"

using namespace phys::units;
using namespace phys::units::io;

int main()
{
    std::cout << "J = " << joule() << std::endl;
}
```

The output produced is:

```Text
J = m+2 kg s-2
```

### Convenience functions

There are several convenience functions, such as:

- `std::string to_magnitude( quantity<...> const & q )` - the quantity's magnitude represented as string
- `std::string to_unit_name( quantity<...> const & q )` - the quantity's unit name, e.g. 'hertz'
- `std::string to_unit_symbol( quantity<...> const & q )` - the quantity's unit symbol, e.g. 'Hz'
- `std::string to_string( long double const value )` - the value of a long double represented as string

In namespace `io`:

- `std::string to_string( quantity<...> const & q )` - the quantity represented as string in scientific notation
- `std::ostream & operator<<( std::ostream & os, quantity<...> const & q )` - output the quantity to a stream in scientific notation

In namespace `io::eng`:

- `std::string to_string( quantity<...> const & q )` - the quantity represented as string in engineering notation
- `std::ostream & operator<<( std::ostream & os, quantity<...> const & q )` - output the quantity to a stream in engineering notation

### Error handling

Error handling with respect to mixing incompatible dimensions occurs at compile-time.

### Mixing run-time and compile-time libraries

Although this library seems to be in the `phys::units` namespace, it does so through *using* the `ct` namespace in the global namespace. So this library actually lives in the `ct::phys::units` namespace. When you want to mix this library with its compile-time companion, the `ct` namespace must be applied. This can be accomplished by defining `PHYS_UNITS_IN_CT_NAMESPACE`.

Dependencies
--------------

This library has no dependencies other than the standard C++ libraries.

Performance
-------------

TBD

```Text
Relative running time (lower is better)

Compiler        Option : double : quantity
-----------------------+--------+-------------
GCC 4.6.2         -O2  :  1     :  . (1)
MS VC6/VS6        -O2  :  .     :  . (1.x)
MS VC8/VS2005     -O2  :  .     :  . (1.x)
MS VC2010/VS2010  -O2  :  .     :  . (1.x)

Measured on a AMD Athlon 64 X2 Dual Core Processor 5600+, 64kB L1 Data, 64kB L1 Instruction, 512kB L2, 3.2 GB RAM
```

Compilers known to work
-------------------------

- GCC 4.5.2, 4.6.2
- MS VC6/VS6 - (VC6 lacks ADL).
- MS VC8/VS2005
- MS VC2010/VS2010

Ideas for improvement
-----------------------

Allow to specify a conversion offset between two units, e.g. to make conversion between 'C and K possible (see Boost.Units).

It may be nice if you can obtain a quantity in a unit representation of your choice, e.g. in kWh in stead of J [m+2 kg s-2]. See G.S. Novak. [Conversion of units of measurement (PDF)](http://reference.kfupm.edu.sa/content/c/o/conversion_of_units_of_measurement__42431.pdf)". 1 August 1997.

References
----------

[1] Michael Kenniston. [The Quantity Library](http://home.xnet.com/~msk/quantity/quantity.html). ([Rationale](http://home.xnet.com/%7Emsk/quantity/quantity.html), Quantity [folder](http://www.xnet.com/%7Emsk/quantity)). 16 July 2001, rev 0.4.

[2] Ambler Thompson and Barry N. Taylor. [Guide for the Use of the International System of Units (SI)](http://physics.nist.gov/cuu/pdf/sp811.pdf). NIST Special Publication 811 2008 Edition.

[3] David B. Newell and Eite Tiesinga, Editors. [The International System of Units (SI)](https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.330-2019). NIST Special Publication 330 2019 Edition.
